# JSON Web Token (JWT)
> JSON Web Token (JWT) is an open standard RFC 7519, that defines a compact and self-contained way for securely transmitting information between parties as a JSON object.

> JWTs are used for authentication and authorization in Spring Boot applications. RESTful APIs provide this functionality (authentication and authorization).
REST is an acronym for REpresentational State Transfer. It is a software-architectural style, in which there is a stateless communication between client and server.

> Stateless means that the server does not have to store the user cookies or other session data for any incoming request. Rather, the server authenticates a user based on JWT.

> RESTful APIs help to keep clients and server independent from each other. This way, a client from any platform (Java, .net, PHP, Android, or any other) can communicate (or request a resource) to the server having REST API endpoints.

### - @JsonProperty
> To rename the incoming json name with Java variable name property

### Entity vs DTO vs Response Object
- Entity is like the Java object that contains the data, which is fast to develop that may cause a lot more issues that affects layers directly.
- DTO is the object that contains all/some data from entity and will not affects the original data in the layer, just a representation object
- Response object is a subset of DTO, it contains all/some data from DTO and mostly used in return data to client

## JSON Web Token Structure
- Header
  - Type of token
  - signing method/algorithm
```json
  "alg":"HS256",
  "typ":"JWT"
```
- Payload
  - contains the claims
```json
  "sub":"1234",
  "name":"Neo Chen",
  "admin":true
```
- Signature
  - encoded header
  - encoded payload
  - a secret
  - the algorithm specified in the header and sign that
```jason
 HMACSHA256(base64URLEncode(header)+"."+base64URLEncode(payload), secret)
```
- Example: {header}.{payload}.{signature}
