# JUnit

## Annotation
- @Test - Declares a method as a test method
- @Before - Runs before each test. It prepares the necessary state of the system (e.g., read input data, initialize the other classes)
- @BeforeClass - Runs once before any of the test methods in the class. In other words, it runs exactly once before the entire set of tests in the class.. @After - Executed after each test. It releases the resources used for the test (e.g., delete temporary data, restore defaults) There are many more annotations that we may learn in the project code.

## Assert statement
> In the AbacusTest.java code snippet, there is a call to assertEquals(60, sum) method. It is an assertion. JUnit provides static methods in Assert class, to test certain conditions. These assertion methods start with the word assert. These methods allow us to specify the error message, the expected output, and the actual output. The assertion method checks the value returned by a test to the expected value. It throws an AssertionException if the comparison fails. Some useful assertion methods are:

- assertTrue([message,] boolean condition) - Checks that the boolean condition is true.
- assertFalse([message,] boolean condition) - Checks that the boolean condition is false.
- assertEquals([message,] expected, actual) - Tests that two values are the same.
- assertEquals([message,] expected, actual, tolerance) - Tests whether float or double values are identical. The tolerance is the number of decimals, which must be the same.
- assertNull([message,] object) - Checks that the object is null.

### Failed Tests
It is essential to check our methods using the corresponding test methods. If a test fails, console output would tell what went wrong so that we may make the necessary correction. For example, if we change a statement in Abacus.java from sum += Integer.valueOf(summand); to sum -= Integer.valueOf(summand);, it would produce the following error:
```
There was 1 failure:
1) evaluatesExpression(AbacusTest)
java.lang.AssertionError: expected:<60> but was:<-60>
  at org.junit.Assert.fail(Assert.java:23)
```

