# Docker
> Docker is a tool that helps to create "images". An "image" (or Docker image) is a portable package that contains the application and its dependencies. An "image" can be instantiated multiple numbers of times to create "containers".

Documentation: https://docs.docker.com/

## Containers
> OS level virtualization allows us to run multiple isolated user-space instances in parallel. A "container" (or Docker container) is the isolated user-space instance that has the application code, the required dependencies, and the necessary runtime environment to run the application. Containers can dash on heterogeneous platforms.

### Benefit of Containers
- Docker images make it easier for developers to create, deploy, and run applications on different hardware and platforms, quickly and easily. Docker has become an essential tool in CI/CD pipeline as it allows software developers a consistent and automated way to build, package, and test applications.
- Containers share a single kernel and share application libraries.
- Containers cause a lower system overhead as compared to Virtual Machines.

## Docker Commands

- *docker build* . will run the Dockerfile to create an image. A Dockerfile is a text file that contains commands as a step-by-step recipe on how to build up your image. In our case, we would not use a Dockerfile because we will use a pre-created jenkinsci/blueocean image to instantiate a container. For more details about Dockerfile, refer the Build and run your image page.
- *docker images* will print all the available images
- *docker run {IMAGE_ID}* will run a container with the image
- *docker exec* -it sh to attach to a container
- *docker ps* will print all the running containers
- *docker kill {CONTAINER_ID}* will terminate the cont

## Key Terms - Docker
> This is additional learning so that you stay aware of key terminologies of Docker.

- Term	Definition
  -Base Image	A set of common dependencies built into a Docker image that acts as a starting point to build an application’s Docker images to reduce build times
  - Container	Grouped software dependencies and packages that make it easier and more reliable to deploy software
  - Container Registry	A centralized place to store container images
  - Docker-compose	A tool used to run multiple Docker containers at once; often used to specify dependent relationships between containers
  - Dockerfile	A file containing instructions on how to translate an application into an image that can be run in containers
  - Ephemeral	Software property where an application is expected to be short-lived
  - Image	A snapshot of dependencies and code used by Docker containers to run an application
